Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s the
start of a new year, and also the start
of a new three-part mini-series, all
on the theme of “words and language”.
In part one, today’s episode, we are
going to talk about “Words Of The
Year” - the words chosen each year
by dictionaries for their particular
cultural importance that year.
In part two, we are going to talk about
the concept of euphemisms in English
- when you describe something unpleasant
or uncomfortable in a more friendly way.
And in part three, we are going to
talk about the word “enshittification”.
It was coined in 2022, but we’ll
look at what it means, how it has
evolved since then, and what it
tells us about the world we live in.
Ok then, let’s get right into it
and talk about words of the year.
One of the great, but also
frustrating things, about language
is that it is constantly evolving.
Words change their meaning.
Spellings change.
Grammar changes.
Words stop being used.
And entirely new words are introduced.
And the more people that speak
a language, and the greater the
variety of people who speak that
language, the more this is the case.
English, with its hundreds of millions
of native speakers and billions more
non-native speakers, spread over
practically every country in the world,
is in a constant state of evolution.
One of the ways in which lexicographers
try to document this evolution of
language is by choosing a “word of the
year”, a word or expression in English
that has been of particular cultural
significance that year. It doesn’t
have to be a completely new word,
although often it is, but it has to be
a word or expression that entered the
language in a way it never had before.
Now, I should start by saying that
defining a “Word of the Year” isn’t
actually an English-language invention;
it was “inspired” by the German tradition
of Wort des Jahres, “Word of the Year”
in German, which started in 1971.
It’s now a tradition followed by most
major English-language dictionaries,
including the Cambridge and Oxford
Dictionaries, Merriam-Webster,
Dictionary.com, as well as the American
Dialect Society and the Australian
National Dictionary Centre, which
reflect language used in American
and Australian English, respectively.
So, what we are going to do today
is talk about this tradition.
We’ll start by talking about how it
works and the process of how a word ends
up being chosen as “Word of the Year”.
Then we’ll talk about some of
the particularly interesting ones
from the past 20 years or so,
and we’ll end by talking about
the words of the year for 2025.
Let’s start with the basics.
How do dictionaries actually
choose a word of the year?
Well, it all depends
slightly on who you ask.
But broadly speaking, it’s a combination
of data and editorial judgement.
Most major dictionaries now
analyse enormous databases of
written and spoken English.
This used to be primarily from things
like newspapers, books, the radio and TV,
but it’s expanded to include everywhere
that language is recorded: social media,
YouTube videos, podcasts, and so on.
By analysing this data, lexicographers
can identify which words are being
used more than usual, which words have
appeared out of nowhere, and which words
have suddenly taken on new meanings.
So that’s the data side.
But it’s not just a question of numbers.
It also involves people sitting down
and thinking carefully about what a
particular word tells us about that year.
Not just how often it was used, but why.
What does it reveal about how
people were feeling, what they were
talking about, and what mattered
most in that particular moment?
That’s the editorial side.
And some dictionaries
even add a third element.
They release a shortlist, but put
it to a public vote, letting members
of the general population decide
what the word of the year should be.
And while each dictionary might
have its own criteria, there
are usually a few common themes.
Words that reflect politics,
culture, technology, social
movements, and, more recently, the
internet and how we talk online.
So now that we’ve covered the basics of
how the word of the year is chosen, let’s
take a look at some actual examples.
We won’t go through every year, but
I want to share a few highlights
from the past couple of decades.
Some are funny, some are serious, some
are quite surprising, and others you might
already use in your everyday English.
Let’s start by going back to 2005.
That year, the American Dialect
Society chose the word “truthiness”.
Now, although you might look at that
word or hear that word and think, “I
haven’t seen that before, but ok, it has
'truth' in it, and 'iness' probably means
the quality of whatever the adjective
or noun was, in this case 'truth’.
So maybe ‘truthiness’ means something
like 'the quality of being true’”.
That would be a perfectly good guess,
perfectly reasonable, but it isn’t right.
“Truthiness” was a term popularised by
the American comedian Stephen Colbert
to mean something that feels like
it should be true, even if it isn’t.
It was a new word for an old
idea: the idea that people often
believe what they want to be
true, not what is actually true.
With Colbert, he used it to criticise
politicians and media figures who weren’t
so interested in the facts, just in what
sounded good and felt like it was true.
In particular, it was aimed at President
George W. Bush and his famously strong
convictions, like the existence of Saddam
Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction,
even if there wasn’t any evidence.
A nice word, right?
Jumping ahead to 2013, Oxford Dictionaries
chose “selfie” as its word of the year.
As you no doubt know, a “selfie”
is the word for a photo you take of
yourself, typically with your phone.
And although it probably seems completely
unbelievable to anyone under the age
of 18, anyone who lived before the
iPhone and Instagram will know that
this wasn’t something that people
always did, so there wasn’t really
a need for a word to describe it.
It’s interesting to mention this
because the inclusion of this
word as “word of the year” clearly
pinpoints this cultural shift.
And if a historian in 100 years
needs to figure out the exact date
when humans started taking pictures
of themselves en masse, well, the
choice of ‘selfie’ as Word Of The
Year provides a pretty good clue.
And we can go on.
In 2016, ‘post-truth’
was the word of the year.
This referred to a time when
objective facts seemed to matter less
than emotions or personal beliefs.
It was the year of Brexit, the
US presidential election, and
intense political polarisation.
It’s a pretty depressing word,
but one that definitely captured
the feeling of the time.
In 2022, Oxford let the public vote
on the word of the year, and the
winner was “goblin mode”. A goblin,
if you don’t know this word, is a
sort of imaginary, naughty, often ugly
creature that plays tricks on humans.
And “goblin mode” describes
a kind of lazy, messy, and
unapologetically unbothered attitude.
Someone in goblin mode might be
eating junk food in bed and ignoring
all responsibilities, simply not
caring about what anyone else thinks.
It’s not a polite word necessarily, but it
clearly resonated with a lot of people who
were feeling burnt out or just done with
pretending to be productive all the time.
And that brings us to the present.
In a moment, we'll look at the words
that were chosen in 2025, but before we
do, I want to just have a quick pause to
ask what all these words have in common.
They aren’t just words really.
They are signs.
They reflect what people are thinking
about, what people are worried about, what
they’re joking about, and how language
adapts to express new ideas or feelings.
So with that in mind, let’s
turn our attention to 2025.
What were the words of the year this time?
And what do they tell us about
the moment we are living in?
One of them is a bit surprising.
It’s not even a real word
in the traditional sense.
It’s 6 7.
Yes, the numbers six seven.
That was chosen by Dictionary.com
as its word of the year for 2025.
If you’ve heard of this word before, it’s
probably because you have young kids,
and if you haven’t heard of it before and
you’re wondering what it means, the honest
answer is… nobody really seems to know.
I have a six-year-old son, and one of his
friends came over to play the other day.
I asked him–in Swedish, because
we live in Sweden–how are you,
and he responded “six seven”, the
English expression “six seven”.
His mum shrugged and said she
didn’t really know why he said
this, and it seems like there is no
definite answer to what it means.
According to Dictionary.com, 6 7 became
popular on TikTok and other social
media platforms in 2024 and 2025.
It started off as an in-joke, then
a trend, then a meme, and somehow
ended up becoming a phrase that means
everything and nothing at the same time.
Young people have used it in videos,
comments, as a gesture, as a sort of
catch-all response to almost anything.
If someone asks a question and you don’t
really want to answer, you can just say
“six seven”. If you’re joking around with
a friend and want to tease them, just say
“six seven”. It means whatever you want
it to mean, and that’s kind of the point.
The team at Dictionary.com described
it as “a playful, Gen Alpha expression
of absurdist internet humour”. It’s
chaotic, slightly annoying, kind of
meaningless, and oddly fascinating.
And importantly, if you are old enough to
vote, you’re probably too old to use it.
So “6 7” was one of the words that
was chosen. The Collins Dictionary,
interestingly enough, didn’t
even include it in its shortlist.
There were 10 words shortlisted
for its potential word of the
year: ‘aura farming’, ‘biohacking’,
‘broligarchy’, ‘clanker’, ‘coolcation’,
‘glaze’, ‘HENRY’, ‘microretirement’,
‘taskmasking’, and ‘vibe coding’.
We can actually go through
them one by one, quickly.
Aura farming is when people post
highly edited or curated photos
online to boost their image.
Biohacking is the idea of using
science or self-experimentation to
try to improve your body or mind.
Broligarchy describes a group of
powerful men who are all close
friends, a kind of brotherly oligarchy.
Clanker is a derogatory
term used for a computer.
Coolcation is a holiday somewhere cool.
Not cool as in fashionable,
but cool in temperature, often
taken to escape extreme heat.
Glaze is to excessively or
undeservedly praise someone.
HENRY, all in capital letters,
stands for “high earner, not rich
yet”, which is used to describe
someone who earns a lot of money but
still feels financially squeezed.
Microretirement means taking a break
from work, not forever, but for a while,
like a mini retirement earlier in life.
Taskmasking is pretending to
multitask, when in reality you’re
just switching between tasks
and not doing any of them well.
And finally, vibe coding, which is
using AI tools to build software,
and it was this that was the winner.
Vibe coding, if you haven’t heard
the expression, refers to the way
that people are now using artificial
intelligence to write computer code.
Instead of sitting down and typing out
hundreds of lines of code manually,
people–like me–are now “prompting”
AI tools with natural language.
Last year, I built a Chrome Extension
that helps people learn new English
vocabulary, as well as a tool that gives
you feedback on your written English,
and both of those were “vibe-coded”.
I have some knowledge of software
development, but most of the code was
written by AI, with me checking it, rather
than it being written from scratch by me.
If you've done this yourself,
you’ll know it's pretty magical.
It’s a completely new way of building
software, and it’s changing who
gets to call themselves a “coder”.
You no longer need to know
every programming language.
If you know how to ask the AI in the right
way, in some cases that can be enough.
So that’s vibe coding.
And like 6 7, it says something
about the time we are living in.
One word reflects how fast the
next generation is playing with
language and identity online.
The other reflects how fast our
relationship with technology is
changing, especially when it comes
to work, creativity, and skills.
But will people still talk
about ‘vibe coding’ in 20 years?
Well, most probably not.
Software development might not exist in
exactly the same way, and the probability
of someone typing “create a signup
form” into a text interface seems…slim.
And as for ‘6 7’, well, like anything
that starts as an ‘in-joke’, as
soon as it enters the mainstream, it
ceases to be funny, and stops being
used, so the probability of anyone
knowing what ‘6 7’ means in even
10 years time seems equally slim.
Some words of the year,
however, do have staying power.
In 2005, the New Oxford American
Dictionary declared its word of the
year to be a word meaning "a digital
recording of a radio broadcast or
similar program, made available on the
internet for downloading to a personal
audio player”, a word that derived from
a mixture of “broadcast” and “iPod”.
The word was, as you might
have guessed, podcast.
Back then, 20 years ago, it was not just
a new word, but a new concept; the idea
of downloading or streaming spoken content
on demand was still relatively new.
Today, of course, podcasts are
everywhere, including what you
are listening to right now.
So, on one level, these “words of the
year” lists are a bit of harmless fun.
A way for a dictionary to guarantee it’s
going to make the news, and cultural
commentators to have something to write
about during a traditional slow period of
the year, even if that word or expression
is forgotten a matter of 12 months later.
But on another level,
they’re not just words.
They are snapshots.
Tiny time capsules.
A reflection of what
people were talking about.
What people were paying attention to.
What people were concerned
about, confused by, or inventing.
Some, of course, will
fade away into obscurity.
Others might just shape the way we
live and speak for many years to come.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Words Of The Year.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As a reminder, this was part one
of a three-part mini-series on
the theme of words and language.
Next up, we’ll be talking about
euphemisms, and we’ll go through a
bunch of commonly used ones in English.
And in part three, we’ll talk
about the fantastic linguistic and
cultural concept of enshittification.
You can find out more about that
over at leonardoenglish.com.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.